Sobre [[propósito]]

## Alguma indicação bibliográfica
- Abe Arkoff, The Illuminated Life
- Douglas LaBier, “Why It’s Hard to Find Your ‘Life Purpose’ in Today’s World,” Psychology Today;
- Tyler F. Stillman, Roy F. Baumeister, and Frank D. Fincham, “Alone and Without Purpose: Life Loses Meaning Following Social Exclusion,” Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 45, no. 4 (July 2009): 686–94.

## Mercedes em tempo de desânimo mas motivada para construir carro para o Mandela
Up to that time, the Mercedes plant had been plagued with errors, slow production, and unhappy workers. But when presented with the chance to build a car for their national freedom fighter, the workers were energized. In just four days, working mostly unpaid overtime hours, they built Mandela’s red Mercedes by hand, dancing and singing in celebration as they worked. It was an astonishing example of the power of purpose and meaning to instantly transform an organization. The car was presented to Mandela on July 22, 1990.39

## [[Significado]], meaning
Try this experiment: Describe a piece of music without singing or humming it. Even if you have a doctorate in musicology and can use terms like chromatic scale and hemiola without sounding pretentious or ridiculous, it’s nearly impossible to convey what a piece of music is like with words alone. Meaning is the same way. It’s a feeling that is unique to each individual, which is why meaning rarely comes from where an organization’s leadership thinks it should.

## The opposite of meaning is apathy
When an organization is indifferent or even hostile to the idea of asking “why” about work, apathy is the result. Rather than taking ownership of their work and treating it as a matter of personal pride—one of the hallmarks of meaningful work—employees just stop caring. They stand around talking. They mark calendars with lots of colorful blocks to look busier than they are. They take more sick days. They plod through work, doing the minimum. They remain detached from coworkers. They spend time at the office on non-work activities, like surfing the Internet, catching up on email, and making personal calls. The discretionary effort that’s the heart and soul of engagement? Gone, replaced by an attitude best illustrated by a classic speech from our favorite movie, Office Space: Peter: I generally come in at least fifteen minutes late. Uh, I use the side door, that way Lumbergh can’t see me. And, uh, after that I just sorta space out for about an hour. Bob: Space out? Peter: Yeah, I just stare at my desk but it looks like I’m working. I do that for uh, probably another hour after lunch, too. I’d say in a given week I probably only do about fifteen minutes of real, actual work . . . The thing is, Bob, it’s not that I’m lazy, it’s that I just don’t care. Bob: Don’t . . . don’t care? Peter: It’s a problem of motivation, all right? Now if I work my [tail] off and Initech ships a few extra units, I don’t see another dime, so where’s the motivation? And here’s something else, Bob. I have eight different bosses right now. Bob: Eight? Peter: Eight, Bob. So that means that when I make a mistake, I have eight different people coming by to tell me about it. That’s my only real motivation is not to be hassled, that and the fear of losing my job. But you know, Bob, that will only make someone work just hard enough not to get fired.45