# Capítulo 5

4
The Lust and Hunger of Thomas Malthus
The temptations to evil are too strong for human nature to resist. [1]
 
Of the two possible readings of Adam Smith—the theological or the secular—the
Reverend Thomas Malthus clearly opts for the former.[2] At least he does so in his central
text, An Essay on the Principle of Population, which will be our focus in this chapter. Here
is an overtly theological thinker, a pious man, and a priest in the Church of England,
who possesses a strong doctrine of evil, a melancholy view of human nature, and a
foreboding sense of apocalyptic doom.[3] To this impressive list of attributes must be
added spurious calculations, suspicions of manufacturing as unproductive labor,[4] and
profound ethnocentrism, as well as conservative and anti-revolutionary politics.[5]
This should be reason enough to focus on Malthus, but we are also perversely fond of
him, since he challenges the conventional narrative of secularization. According to this
narrative, classical economic theory gained its footing by turning away from the quaint
dabbling with the Bible and theology that we find in Locke and others. It may have
begun to take place with Adam Smith, or it may have happened after the temporary
alliance between theology and economics in the Cambridge School of economics, to
which Malthus himself contributed, but ultimately the former partners of theology and
economics went their own separate ways. Not so Malthus, for he is resolutely theological
in a way that harkens back to the time of Locke. Rather than regarding Malthus as a man
born (1766) a century too late, we interpret his contribution as a clear problematizing of
that supposedly inexorable path of secularization.
Our analysis begins in an unexpected place, with one of Malthus’s sermons. Given on
a Good Friday, it focuses on the atonement of Christ, thereby providing an excellent


insight into Malthus’s theological understanding. Here he cuts through the dross of
moralizing (common elsewhere in his work) and identifies propitiatory atonement as the
key to Christ’s act of salvation. However, we are not interested in that theory of
atonement as such (one of a number of possible approaches to the death and resurrection
of Christ), but rather in the way it reveals a profound doctrine of evil.[6] With this in
mind, we tackle (in some detail) An Essay on the Principle of Population. W
e focus on the
first edition, since in the five later editions Malthus desperately backpedaled from the
stark implications of the first.[7] In this work, the matter of human nature looms large, as
a fallen nature torn between the conflicting forces of lust and hunger, with the stronger
lust channeled into misery and vice when it encounters the limiting force of hunger and
the need for subsistence. From there we turn to Malthus’s reshaping of the myth that we
analyzed in regard to Grotius, Locke, and Smith. The difference is that Malthus offers not
one but five versions of the myth. Of these, only one vainly attempts a plot of progress,
while the remaining four present variations on regress, on the grimmer outcomes of the
Fall. W
e have already traced the tension between the two plot lines in relation to Locke,
but with Malthus regress eclipses progress—and that with a decidedly theological tone.[8]
A Melancholy Hue: On Human Nature
Violence, oppression, falsehood, misery, every hateful vice, and every form of distress, which degrade and
sadden the present state of society, seem to have been generated by the most imperious circumstances, by
laws inherent in the nature of man.[9]
A “free, equal, and reciprocal society”[10] is surely the most desirable, is it not? For those
like Malthus, who appear to champion that curiously new construct known as the
autonomous economy, it seems that it should be. Yet, Malthus paid only lip service to
this position on human nature, a position that Locke had wrought from his biblical
interpretation and Smith had asserted with polemic insistence. The irresistible presence
of evil—that tendency of human beings to do the worst to themselves and to others—
overwhelms Malthus’s fleeting assertions of human freedom and equality. The same
applies to self-love (or self-interest), the leitmotif of Smith. Malthus may have
occasionally opined that self-love is a positive force, one that leads to the betterment of
the human condition,[11] but he asserted it only half-heartedly. In truth, Malthus
interprets self-interest as greed and selfishness, the “general occasion of injustice, fraud,
oppression and iniquity.”[12] In a society without laws governing property, anarchy
would reign, so much so that everyone would fearfully guard with force what little they


have.[13] The great virtue of benevolence turns weak in the face of such selfishness,
fading all too readily when confronted by hardship and want. When self-love is the
“main-spring of the great machine,” everyone suffers.[14]
Fallen Creatures
The original sin of man is the torpor and corruption of the chaotic matter in which he may be said to be
born.[15]
W
e are all fallen creatures, sinning despite ourselves. This indicates not so much a
jaundiced view of human nature or the expostulations of a grumpy man but rather a
strong doctrine of evil, which might be regarded as the most refreshing feature of
Malthus’ otherwise woefully inadequate collection of writings. In order to witness
Malthus’s understanding of evil in its full glory, we turn to a sermon he delivered on
Good Friday in 1827 (and again in 1832).[16] Not surprisingly—given the situation—
Malthus speaks about the death of Christ and his act of atonement. W
e should
understand Christ’s work, he suggests, not as mere instruction and example but as
propitiation, a vicarious and propitiatory sacrifice. Of all the Christological themes in the
New Testament—prophet, messiah, victor against Satan, wisdom teacher, model to
emulate—sacrifice is the starkest. Malthus draws on the New Testament for this position,
[17] but its roots lie in the sacrificial ideology of ancient Southwest Asia, in which the
wrath of the gods had to be appeased by the offering of sacrifices. While the wrath may
have been manifested in fire, pestilence, famine, or a marauding army, it was generated by
wrongs committed by the people. And so, to ameliorate divine anger for a wrong
committed, a sacrifice was made. It may have been a sheep, goat, ox, or pig, as well as the
occasional human sacrifice. So it is with Christ, according to Malthus: he stands in our
place in order to take the full brunt of God’s wrath. This is the “greatest and most
important event to mankind recorded in the Scriptures.”[18]
The contours of the doctrine of propitiatory sacrifice are known well enough, but we
would like to stress the point that a strong and stark understanding of the function of
Christ’s death assumes an equally strong doctrine of sin. Christ’s death constitutes “a
remission of sins,” or even more forcefully, in the words of John’s first letter: “If any man
sins, we have an advocate with the father Jesus Christ the Righteous; and he is the
propitiation for our Sins, and not for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole
world.”[19] That is, the efficacy of the Christ’s satisfaction is even greater than what it


overcomes—namely, the collective sin of the entire human race, if not the whole of nature.
Malthus sums up his position on sin and Christ’s death as follows:
The language of the inspired writers then is, “that Christ suffered for our sins, the just for the unjust”, that
he gave himself as a ransom; that he redeemed us by his blood, redeemed us from the curse of the law, being
made a curse for us; that he is our advocate, intercessor and propitiation; that he was made perfect through
sufferings, and being made perfect became the author of eternal salvation unto all them that obey him.[20]
Evil is powerful indeed. “Real and essential,” it reveals a deep-seated cause of impurity[21]
and demands that none less than Christ himself suffer and die in order to avoid the
punishment God would mete out to all human beings.[22] The punishment fits the crime;
or, rather, the mitigation of the punishment fits the crime. But how are human beings to
respond? At times, Malthus slips into earnest moralizing, urging that we should strive to
live virtuous lives.[23] Yet at other times, he realizes that the appropriate response is to
repent and wisely to accept the benefit (escaping future punishment and obtaining future
happiness) without asking exactly how it was achieved. Consequently, the only response
to God’s grace is to love God and one’s neighbor in return. In addition, we wish to
emphasize one more response: Christ’s propitiation should make us acutely aware of how
heinous our sins truly are and of how much suffering they produce.[24] After all, we are
“miserable sinners” lying in “darkness and the shadow of death.”[25] This awareness of
the pervasiveness and persistence of sin is found throughout Malthus’s economic works.
[26]
Misery, Vice, and Perfectibility
To prevent the recurrence of misery, is, alas! beyond the power of man.[27]
In light of this soberly realistic assessment of human nature, it should come as no
surprise that Malthus identifies the two basic human drives as lust and hunger. As might
be expected, he uses politer terms (euphemisms perhaps), calling them population and
subsistence. Human beings need sex and food not only to survive but also to prosper.
However, the two are not equal; lust is the more powerful, pushing human beings to
copulate and bear offspring. By contrast, hunger is the weaker force, quailing before the
onrush of lust. What Malthus means is that people respond to the urge to have sex
without thinking of the consequences. Can we feed the children? Is there enough land to
grow crops and tend herds? These questions often occur later, when large broods of
children come crying for want of sustenance. The reason is that although people need
food, the earth does not possess sufficient resources to feed ever more mouths. W
e will


return to this grim tension and its many twists in more detail below
, when we deal with
the various forms of Malthus’s myths. Here, we wish to point out that the struggle
between lust and hunger is one of the manifestations of the fallen nature of human
existence.
Close on the heels of sex and food comes another pair: misery and vice, the “bitter
ingredients in the cup of human life.”[28] Quite literally, they follow close behind. Given
the tension between lust and hunger and the resultant overpopulation, one encounters all
manner of misery: unwholesome manufactures, unhealthy cities, poverty, war, sickness,
deformities, epidemics, pestilence, plagues, and premature death. And if one seeks to
check the desire for sex, then it diverts into vice. The desire for sex cannot be stopped, so
it is inevitably rechanneled. Being a polite, if somewhat conservative vicar, Malthus does
not dare say what type of vice, but it would seem to concern sex. Fornication, adultery,
prostitution—perhaps also anal sex, felching, bestiality, formicophilia[29]—these and more
are the vices generated by checks on the act of lust.
It should come as no surprise that Malthus was not enamored with the various mildly
radical proposals, current at his time concerning the perfectibility of human beings and
society. A significant portion of his essay on population attacks the work of the Marquis
de Condorcet and William Godwin.[30] It is a stretch, however, to suggest that these
liberal utopians were seriously radical, for they were very much part and parcel of the
polite circles of ruling class debate. The old order, of the Church of England and the
aristocracy, may have felt that “Philosophic Radicals” led by Jeremy Bentham and James
Mill threatened all that was good and just, and they may have regarded Godwin as a
dangerous Jacobin, but they spoke the same language and shared the same assumptions.
The working poor—the true radicals who organized and challenged the system—always
remained outside the circle, to be criticized, denigrated, and patronized.[31] For eight
chapters,[32] Malthus systematically questions the overconfidence in human progress
expressed in such works. The gradual but inevitable improvement of society, the
transformation of the earth into a vast garden of delights, the shedding of the constraints
of institutions and government, the freedom of sexual expression with the abolition of
marriage, the advance of truth and virtue, the dominance of reason over the baser
passions, even the prolongation of human life through science to the point of
immortality—Malthus sees all these as “little better than a dream, a beautiful phantom of
the imagination.”[33] Instead, the true situation of human beings on earth is one of the
impossible struggles between lust and hunger, and of the misery and vice that result. W
e
suggest that Malthus’s attacks evince not only his doctrine of evil but also an anti-


Edenic theme. If we understand the Garden of Eden (following the line of Ernst Bloch) as
a utopian myth, one that expresses a desire for the future rather than a conservative wish
for a confected Golden Age, then Malthus pours a few buckets of cold water on any such
hope.
Retelling and Retelling the Myth
The vices and moral weakness of man can never be wholly eradicated.[34]
Thus far, Malthus seems rather straightforward on the matters of sin, evil, and human
nature. But crouching at the door are many twists, contradictions, and dialectical turns,
all of which stem from the narrative of the Fall. Immediately they appear, for Malthus
offers not one version of the myth but five.[35] Of these, a forlorn and solitary version
attempts a narrative of progress, which might be expected in relation to the other political
economists. However, the attempt comes across as feeble and out of character with
Malthus’s perspective on human nature. So the remaining versions – four of them –
present various narratives of regress, albeit with a twist that comes straight out of the
biblical account of the Fall. Like the flawed crystal in the biblical account—in which
goodness turns into evil through its very goodness—Malthus’s accounts track the way
divine gifts end up producing the evils of misery and vice. W
e begin with his initial
effort at a narrative of progress before assessing a melancholy feast of disaster stories.
From Savagery to Civilization
Man as he really is, inert, sluggish, and averse from labour, unless compelled by necessity.[36]
Savage hunters, barbarian shepherds, industrious civilization: through these three
(somewhat) contrived stages, Malthus narrates the emergence of the wonders of
commerce and diligent agriculture. Although he rolls out the story early in his essay on
population, it is by no means original to Malthus.[37] This version of the myth seems a
half-hearted effort by Malthus to locate his proposals within an agreed story of how we
arrived here in the present. At times, his phrases echo Adam Smith—“in the rudest state of
mankind”—and he assumes that the moment and place in which he lives is the great
culmination of a historical process that began in ignorance, darkness, and animal-like
existence. Nonetheless, Malthus tries to give this story a twist of his own, identifying the


efforts of people to overcome hunger and the growth of population as the root causes of
their misery.
Drawing upon North America—the beloved source of nearly all those we consider in
this book, and later a host of others—Malthus finds his evidence for the first phase of
hunters and savages. In this “infancy of man in the simplest state,” he sees no liberty or
equality. Tyrannical men lord it over women, who must suffer the brunt of providing
food from meager resources in slave-like conditions. Denigrating semi-nomadic life,
which he regards as a further burden on the delicacy of women, Malthus simply cannot
envision the agency of women as a means of ensuring that the population remains
optimal rather than maximal under a subsistence survival economic mode. Instead, he
attributes the low population to the rigors of life, to the apathy of sexual appetite, and to
the practices of exposing infants and leaving the elderly to die—“thus violating the first
feelings of nature.”[38] This brutal existence is nothing more than a “blot of misery.”[39]
Malthus shares the deep ethnocentrism that we also found in Locke and Smith,
although, in Malthus’s case, this imaginary depiction is exacerbated by his assumption
that settled life is far preferable. People engage in nomadism only because of dire
necessity and misery. Thus, if indigenous people have the option, they will obviously
settle down (witness the way they gather around European settlements). Similar to Locke
and Smith, this ethnocentrism is both spatial and temporal.[40] Spatially, plenty of these
constructed savages live still in this day and age, only far from civilization. Temporally,
one can project this image into the past and speculate concerning the grim origins of
human society. Yet, as we argued earlier, this production of the savage reveals the
profound specificity of classical economic theory, its location in a particular time and
place, and thereby its structural limits.
The first phase of human existence constitutes the lowest of the low
. The only way
from here is upward, if ever so slightly. So it is with the next phase, which consists of the
barbarian shepherds. Malthus extends his ethnographic coding by locating this phase in
an easterly direction, which incorporates the Scythians, the Huns under Attila, and the
Mongolian hordes under Genghis Khan. Life was somewhat better for the women, and
the men were able to find pasture for their cattle and families. But with greater resources,
their populations burgeoned, soon surpassing local capacities. As a result, they pushed
out, warriors on the move, seeking new pastures and putting to the sword all those in
their path. Hunger drove them
from their native haunts, like so many famished wolves in search of prey. Set in motion by this all powerful
cause, clouds of Barbarians seemed to collect from all points of the northern hemisphere. Gathering fresh


darkness and terror as they rolled on, the congregated bodies at length obscured the sun of Italy and sunk
the whole world in universal night.[41]
The disadvantages of this stage clearly outweigh the benefits. From China, through
Europe, to Egypt, vast exterminations were the order of the day, with populations
springing up again only to be distressed and angry from hunger, setting out for yet
more conquest, rape, and mayhem. Surely, a better way than this “natural carelessness of
the barbaric character” could be found.[42]
So we come to the third stage—pasture and tillage. Characteristic of “civilized”
nations (especially those in northern Europe), this way of life could be perused by
Malthus’s own eye. The industriousness of the peoples has been able to raise the
population to greater levels than in ancient times. At this point, Malthus’s narrative of
progress slowly begins to unravel. In his hands, the story faces two snags. The first is
caused by that constant bugbear of the classical economists—China. As we saw with
Adam Smith, China constituted a distinct problem: How could China be the most fertile,
most populous, most assiduous with its cultivation, and the most powerful of nations?
Does that not mean China is at the apex of the path to civilization, that it outstrips
Europe, if not England itself? Malthus is called upon to produce evidence that discounts
China’s preeminence. From “specialists” such as David Hume and Adam Smith, Malthus
reads that China’s people marry at a young age and that its population is stable. How can
this be? The only explanation is that they must expose excess children so that they die.
[43] Thus, on the basis of pure speculation, China is categorized as barbarian rather than
civilized, indeed no better than the primitive savages of the first stage.
The second snag undermines the narrative of progress, producing a grimmer ending
than one might expect. The treatment of the final stage begins well enough, especially
with the threat from China dispatched. Malthus turns to England as the best example of
the way in which a civilized country keeps its population in check. Far from exposing
children, the English of modest means use cautious reason. In order to illustrate his
point, he provides four rather cute vignettes, one of an educated man with just enough
resources to be a gentleman (an autobiographical note creeps in here), one of the son of a
farmer, one of a laborer, and finally one of a servant. Facing the prospect of marriage (for
sex and offspring can occur only in that context), they consider carefully the money
available to support not one child but four or five. Realizing the difficulty and injustice
of procreating without sufficient funds, they put off reproducing until a more favorable
time.
An excellent way to finish this version of the myth, is it not? Reason and moral


impulse prevent possible misery and disaster. Although Malthus would fall back on moral
sanction in subsequent revisions of An Essay on the Principles of Population, in this stark
first edition that option is decidedly muted. So in this version of the myth, he closes by
writing:
If this sketch of the state of society in England be near the truth, and I do not conceive that it is
exaggerated, it will be allowed that the preventive check to population in this country operates, though with
varied force, through all the classes of the community. The same observation will hold true with regard to
all old states. The effects, indeed, of these restraints upon marriage are but too conspicuous in the
consequent vices that are produced in almost every part of the world, vices that are continually involving
both sexes in inextricable unhappiness.[44]
Prudence has given way to vice, modest happiness to unhappiness. Reasoned and calm
planning in light of one’s limited circumstances is no match for the rampaging forces of
lust, sex, and procreation. With no mate upon which to vent one’s lust, the man in
question (these examples are always of men) must find other outlets.
The Basic Postulata: The Reverend’s Lust and Hunger
The cravings of hunger, the love of liquor, the desire of possessing a beautiful woman, will urge men to
actions, of the fatal consequences of which, to the general interests of society, they are perfectly well
convinced, even at the very time they commit them.[45]
A narrative of progress, culminating with the most civilized country on earth and in
history, could never be sustained in light of Malthus’s overarching framework. Not
surprisingly, the narrative of progress unravels at the close, pushed to its dire conclusion
by the other versions of the myth that crowd Malthus’s text. Earlier, we mentioned the
basic tension in Malthus’s theory, between lust and hunger. However, since it is the key
to the remaining versions of the myth, we expand on that tension now (not least because
it reveals the Reverend squirming over matters of sex).
Let us begin with his bald statement:
I think I may fairly make two postulata.
First, That food is necessary to the existence of man.
Secondly, That the passion between the sexes is necessary and will remain nearly in its present state.
These two laws, ever since we have had any knowledge of mankind, appear to have been fixed laws of
our nature, and, as we have not hitherto seen any alteration in them, we have no right to conclude that they
will ever cease to be what they now are, without an immediate act of power in that Being who first arranged
the system of the universe, and for the advantage of his creatures, still executes, according to fixed laws, all
its various operations.[46]


Once again, human nature is the issue—now reinforced with the curious assertion
concerning laws laid down by none other than God. As we mentioned earlier, this is a
somewhat dourer view of human nature than the sunny proposals of Grotius, Locke, and
especially Smith, with their prattle about freedom and equality. But laws? The very
assertion that one’s philosophical hypotheses are laws of the universe seems to have been
a fashion among economists and philosophers of the time—a mark of their bounded
specificity, we would suggest, but also a rhetorical device to give weight to their
arguments. To bolster his scientific credentials, Malthus soon deploys mathematical
terms. The availability of food may increase in an “arithmetical ratio,” he opines, but
population does so in a “geometrical ratio.”[47] One presumes he means addition and
multiplication, or perhaps “exponential” for the latter, as is the fashion today.
Unperturbed, Malthus later speaks of the algebra of lust: “The passion between the sexes
has appeared in every age to be so nearly the same that it may always be considered, in
algebraic language, as a given quantity.”[48] His quirky approach to matters of sex
notwithstanding, the effect is to provide a scientific aura to his ponderings. That God
—“the Being who first arranged the system of the universe”—should make an appearance
here seems an effort to add weight to a rather thin argument full of dubious calculations
and moral earnestness.
Of these two “scientific laws,” lust is the stronger, no matter how much geometry and
algebra is involved. More precisely, the mathematical nature of the two laws weighs the
equations in lust’s favor. Given the geometrical nature of lust, “A slight acquaintance
with numbers will shew the immensity of the first power in comparison of the
second.”[49] One cannot help but wonder what a Malthusian pick-up line might be: “In
light of the irresistible geometrical power of my libido, would you care to . . .?” Perhaps,
he would hold forth on magnets and the map of Madagascar:
One feature of an object may be as distinct, and excite as different emotions, from the aggregate as any two
things the most remote, as a beautiful woman, and a map of Madagascar. It is “the symmetry of person, the
vivacity, the voluptuous softness of temper, the affectionate kindness of feelings, the imagination and the
wit” of a woman that excite the passion of love, and not the mere distinction of her being female. Urged by
the passion of love, men have been driven into acts highly prejudicial to the general interests of society, but
probably they would have found no difficulty in resisting the temptation, had it appeared in the form of a
woman with no other attractions whatever but her sex. To strip sensual pleasures of all their adjuncts, in
order to prove their inferiority, is to deprive a magnet of some of its most essential causes of attraction, and
then to say that it is weak and inefficient.[50]
Yet before the power of lust overwhelms him, Malthus desperately reaches for reason,
which assists him in preventing the “abuse” of sensual pleasures.[51] Passion, virtue, and


reason must ideally operate as a team. This is not to say that sensual pleasures can be
entirely extinguished, for that would undermine his whole argument. In the end,
however, Malthus evinces an abhorrence of sex unchained. In reply to William Godwin’s
proposal that the strictures of marriage would free people up to have sex as they choose,
Malthus recoils in moral disgust. How shameful, undignified, and animal-like![52] After
all, does not lust unchained lead to countless problems, which go by the name of
numerous offspring?
But is lust really the more powerful? If it comes to a question of either sex or food,
what would one choose, a romp or a hearty meal? Malthus avers that lust always
triumphs, but his own account suggests that hunger is at least its equal. Populations may
grow in advantageous circumstances, but they run up against the limits of the food
available.[53] If lust were the greater, would it not be able to overcome hunger? Malthus
may seek a way of keeping population down to the level of the means of subsistence,
even suggesting that no one has, as yet, found a way to do so.[54] Here, we encounter
classic Malthusian scaremongering, according to which population is the cause of our
ills. Control population and you have the formula for happiness, sustainable lives,
workable economies, and ecological stability. Yet, despite his assertions concerning the
superior power of lust, he offers a series of means by which that limitation is already
achieved.
Malthus discusses natural disasters, famines, and epidemics at some length and
concludes that the latter two supposedly are caused by overpopulation.[55] W
ar also gains
a mention, as does reason. A man may feel the need to procreate and may seek a woman
with whom to do so, but if he is of limited means he will sit down and reason that it
would be wise to wait a while. Who would want to bring into the world children one
could barely feed, let alone support a wife?[56] Besides, if our man is feeling hot and
bothered, a spot of vice is always available to let off some steam. Malthus mentions one
more limitation: the condition of the poor. Malthus speaks of the inadequate and
cramped accommodation, of the insufficient and inferior quality of the food, and of the
simple fact that significant numbers of the poor starve to death. Indeed, these conditions
are more consistently powerful than the periodic effects of epidemics.
These various checks seem to be stronger than Malthus is prepared to admit. Or
perhaps he does realize their strength, for he falls back on the proposal that they
constitute forms of misery—the inevitable outcome of lust. In order to drive home his
argument, Malthus resorts to apocalyptic imagery, not only of a distinctly biblical feel but
also in tones that remind one of Malthusians in our own day:


The power of population is so superior to the power in the earth to produce subsistence for man, that
premature death must in some shape or other visit the human race. The vices of mankind are active and able
ministers of depopulation. They are the precursors in the great army of destruction; and often finish the
dreadful work themselves. But should they fail in this war of extermination, sickly seasons, epidemics,
pestilence, and plague, advance in terrific array, and sweep off their thousands and ten thousands. Should
success be still incomplete, gigantic inevitable famine stalks in the rear, and with one mighty blow levels the
population with the food of the world.[57]
W
ould it not be better to find a more humane way to curb the effects of lust? Are not
foresight and planning better inhibitors than the want and sickness that follow in the
train of excess population?[58] This argument led some of Malthus’s early critics to
suggest that he had provided a perfectly good argument for prostitution, as a necessary
safety valve for the sake of population control, or at least that vice had a useful social
function (in the vein of Mandeville’s F
able of the Bees[59]) and was preferable to misery.
[60] Malthus’s desperate efforts at answering this charge in the subsequent editions of the
essay—urging moral restraint and sanction, even temporary celibacy[61]—constitute a
weak and moralizing retreat. W
e will argue later that these moves were actually
theological, for Malthus desperately wanted to avoid a dialectical understanding of evil,
an understanding to which his argument inexorably leads.
This is the framework of the remaining four versions of the Malthusian myth,
versions that depart notably from the conventional one that he inherited from Grotius and
Locke, only to be retold by Smith, Ricardo, and J. S. Mill. Before we turn to Malthus’s
efforts at further storytelling, we would like to note the Marxist point that population is
never greater than the dominant mode of production. To be sure, Malthus draws nigh to
such a point, only to fall away as a result of the inadequate method he uses. The basic
proposal that population cannot increase without the means of subsistence is wide open
to the next step, namely, that the mechanisms of subsistence are determined by the mode
of production in question. Each mode enables certain methods and technologies while
stymieing others. The same is true with population, in which each mode enables a
certain number beyond its predecessor and then allows no more.[62] Malthus offers further
hints and possibilities: he mentions the futility of furthering happiness in the desire for
fine silks, cottons, and laces, without asking the obvious class question as to the
detrimental effects of a ruling class; he opines that a rise in working class wages has no
material benefit in the long run, without inquiring into the exploitive nature of the wage
relation itself; he laments the deleterious effects of current structures on the poor, without
asking why they are poor; he wishes for a history of the working class, while writing so
comprehensively from the perspective of the ruling class.[63] On each occasion, his


argument would be strengthened immeasurably by asking the real, deeper questions. But
he cannot, as the second and subsequent editions of the essay on population show so
well with their stress on moral sanctions (perhaps even chastity for the unmarried). The
problem is not merely that Malthus lacked the ability to engage in such analysis but also
that to broach such questions would bring his whole argument crashing down. Stay
with his framework he must, for it enables his obsessive retelling of the myth, now in a
form that is both grimmer and closer to his heart.
The Traps of God’s Good Gifts
Those deeper seated causes of impurity that corrupt the springs and render turbid the whole stream of
human life.[64]
Four of these versions appear at various points, and each one turns on a paradox: what
initially appears to be good turns out to be evil. Indeed, the command of God to subdue
the earth and multiply (Gen 1:28), along with the gifts that spur men to improve their lot,
end up causing misery and suffering. Goodness is itself a trap, one that cannot avoid
evil. Implicit in Malthus’s retellings of these myths is what can only be called a dialectical
understanding of good and evil. W
e will return to this matter in the conclusion; at
present, we focus on the myths.
Our discussion begins with the last of the four myths of regress, for it is the most
theological of all. It appears in the eighteenth chapter of An Essay on the Principle of
Population. Here the contradiction of the Fall is the narrative key, although it is present in
two forms. In the first, good comes from evil: the evils of hunger and cold (in general,
the wants of the body) act as spurs to action from inaction. Given that human beings are
lazy and sluggish by nature, we improve ourselves only when spurred to do so. A cold
winter forces us to seek ways to become warm—to hunt animals for skins perhaps, or to
raise sheep and plants for wool and fiber. Hunger forces us to seek food, whether by
gathering wild plants and hunting animals or through the more “civilized” approaches of
tilling the earth and herding sheep, goats, pigs, and bovines. If these annoying spurs (we
might even call them sufferings) did not exist, “the savage would slumber for ever under
his tree unless he were roused from his torpor by the cravings of hunger or the pinchings
of cold.”[65] They also help to ignite the spark of intelligence out of the inert clay
from which we were created (Gen 2:7), if not to invent that other spark which produces
fire. This plot line serves a number of purposes in Malthus’s theory, some more benign
than others. Thus, it provides the rudiments of an epistemology, the ultimate source of


the deep thoughts of a philosopher, the arresting reconstructions of the historian, or the
imaginary flights of a poet. But it also underlays Malthus’s criticisms of any form of
welfare—whether it be for the old, single mothers, or the poor through the rudimentary
poor laws. Such measures remove the incentives of acute suffering and want, if not of the
perpetual threat of death, for without such “incentives,” people would lapse into their
natural listlessness and fail to seek their own improvement.[66]
Evil, of a more benign or vicious form, produces good, all due to the wise Providence
of our creator. Yet the spur of evil also provides Malthus with his initial theory of the
origins of labor (he will contradict himself soon enough, as we show in a moment). Like
Grotius and Locke before him, Malthus seeks to avoid Gen. 3:17-19, in which labor is
the punishment for the disobedience of the first human beings. Unlike Locke’s
convoluted attempts to work his way around this biblical text, Malthus breezily observes
that the “Supreme Being has ordained that the earth shall not produce good in great
quantities till much preparatory labour and ingenuity has been exercised upon its
surface.”[67] Obviously, the hunger that ensues from this apparently inadequate provision
is part of the creator’s larger plan. In order to eat, one must clear the land and plow it,
collect seeds and sow them, nurture and reap crops, thresh and prepare food.[68] Adam
and Eve become tillers of the soil as a result of the divine plan, not as a punishment.
Thus far, Malthus’s retelling seems to be a narrative of progress, spurred on by the
evils that give rise to good. But now he introduces a twist, which we suggest is the
return of the Fall that has been erased so easily from the story thus far. The twist begins
with a fourth spur to activity, which is none other than lust, or, more politely, the
“unremitted excitements” needed to populate the earth.[69] Initially, this twist is also part
of the divine plan, if not the command to subdue the earth and multiply (Gen. 1:28). Or
rather, the act of Providence ensures that the drive to reproduce is greater than the earth’s
ability to sustain the many fruits of men’s loins. As a result, increasingly more of the
earth becomes cultivated in order to meet the demand, and the vast numbers of people
ensure that war or famine or disaster will not wipe out the population completely. But is
this not a problem, given Malthus’s framing of the tensions between lust and hunger,
between the stronger drive to populate and the weaker need for sustenance?
Now he voices his doubts: “But it is impossible that this law can operate, and produce
the effects apparently intended by the Supreme Being, without occasioning partial
evil.”[70] The evil he mentions is embodied in the misery and vice that result from lust as
it runs up against hunger. Now Malthus is caught: he has constructed a story based
upon the outworking of Providence, but he bumps into the obvious problem that


Providence causes evil. This is of course the key to the biblical story of the Fall, for God
creates a garden, a paradise that contains the mechanism for its own undoing. Indeed,
the tree of the knowledge of good and evil is the narrative device that turns good to evil,
thereby explaining the punishment and banishment of the first human beings from the
garden. Yet, as with Grotius and Locke, the tree and its implications may also be read in a
fortuitous manner. By eating from the tree, the first human beings are able to get on with
their real lives; ultimately, they enable Christ to descend to earth for the sake of salvation.
So good may also come from evil.
Malthus seems to want it both ways. Or rather, he quickly attempts to use the
fortuitous reading to escape the implications of the negative one. Thus, evil may be
generated by the desire for sex, “but a little reflection may, perhaps, satisfy us, that it
produces a great overbalance of good.”[71] “Overbalance” may be read in a stronger or
weaker sense: either an overbalance of good leads to evil, or the partial evil is outweighed
by the good. Malthus seems to mean the second, weaker version, but he leaves open the
possibility of the stronger. Perhaps fearful of this line of thought, he soon opines: “It
seems, however, every way probable that even the acknowledged difficulties occasioned
by the law of population tend rather to promote than impede the general purpose of
Providence.”[72]
The lameness of this assertion is evident in the concluding reflections of the myth,
which curiously urge the importance of the “middle regions of society.” Malthus makes a
grand and uncharacteristic defense of the importance of the middle class, which is
likened to the temperate zones of the earth or the solid timber in the middle of an oak
tree. To be sure, the sun also shines on the tropics and the polar regions, and an oak tree
certainly needs its roots and foliage. These extremities are necessary, just like the idle rich
and the suffering poor. On them do the evils occasioned by lack of incentive (the rich)
and of excess misery and vice from uncontrollable lust (the poor) descend—hence, the
“partial” evil. Yet, the middle regions are best positioned to benefit from the command of
the Divine Creator: “If no man could hope to rise or fear to fall, in society, if industry did
not bring with it its reward and idleness its punishment, the middle parts would not
certainly be what they now are.”[73]
This stunningly mediocre and hastily penned conclusion cannot conceal the problem
Malthus has broached: God creates a good that leads to evil. The suggestion that evil
afflicts only some outside the middle regions or that it is a law of nature that
inadvertently cuts down some in its path (much like the unwanted consequences of
gravity for the one who falls from a height) cannot sidestep the problem. No matter how


hard Malthus tries to skip past this stark theological point, he must deal with it elsewhere.
The much-debated excision of the last two chapters from subsequent editions of the
essay on population constitutes, we suggest, one of his efforts to avoid this theological
conclusion. Of course, these deletions are comprised of the overtly theological chapters
where this myth is found, and their removal has led critics to propose several theories:
that Malthus gave up on his theological pretensions thereafter; or that he realized the
unorthodoxy of the chapters’ theological views (immortality as conditional, denial of
original sin, and of life as a trial); or that the deleted sections contain bad theology,
largely due to his training at Cambridge, and that he subsequently learned a “better”
theology under the influence of William Paley,[74] namely, that life in this world is a
testing ground for the next world; or finally, that it indicates the extraneous nature,
specifically for analysis and public policy, of his theology precisely because his
theological approach is coterminous with a proposed utilitarianism.[75] None of these
interpretations capture the theological problem that the urbane vicar had uncovered: God
is the source of both good and evil. In fact, we suggest that his repeated efforts to retell
and reshape the myth function as signals of his desperate effort to avoid the conclusion
that God’s goodness leads to evil. Yet this is the direction to which his entire argument
tends.
Facing up to Evil
On the contrary, it must certainly be considered as an evil, and every institution that promotes it is
essentially bad and impolitic.[76]
W
e examine the remaining three versions of the myth together,[77] for they exhibit the
same plot line: an initial moment of ostensible paradise faces internal contradictions that
lead inevitably to suffering, in response to which systemic inequality must be instituted
in order to offer at least a semblance of order. The social condition that results is a far cry
from the ideal state with which we began. An obvious narrative of regress, this story
follows more closely the canonical presentation of the biblical story of the Fall and thereby
undoes Malthus’s dabbling with narratives of progress elsewhere. Paradise is lost through
the inveterate evil of human beings, which must then be checked by tough sanctions. In
these accounts, Malthus does not so much locate a moment at which everything comes
crashing down, but an internal contradiction in paradise itself. That is, freedom, equality,
happiness, innocence, and prosperity enable a people to grow without restraint. Yet, this
very goodness leads to overpopulation and thereby misery and vice.


Two alternative depictions of this initial paradise appear in Malthus’s text, the one
drawn from the English colonies of North America and the other from the proposals of
William Godwin. The former may be Malthus’s own depiction, but it segues smoothly
into that of Godwin. This connection produces a fold-back effect, for the harsher
criticisms of Godwin’s perfectible society become criticisms of Malthus’s idyllic image
of North America. As we indicated earlier, Godwin proposes an Eden to come, which is
full of food and happiness, free of institutions and the shackles of marriage, and fostered
by the advance of reason and benevolence over passions and self-interest. Yet Malthus
positions this Godwinian paradise in the past and explores the mechanisms of its
undoing—mechanisms that also appear in his depiction of the North American garden.
W
e will dwell with that depiction for a while, before returning to the criticisms of
Godwin.
“Thus in the beginning all the world was America,”[78] wrote Locke some decades
before Malthus. North America did seem to provide a laboratory experiment for how to
begin again, to retrace one’s steps from the earliest, Edenic moment to the present. It
goes without saying that the English colonies provided the ideal model, so Malthus
opens his account by disparaging the Spanish and Portuguese colonies in the Americas,
as well as the Dutch and French colonies in the East Indies. By contrast, the English
colonies operated in liberty and equality.[79] With favorable government, the absence of
primogeniture and tithes, plenty of cheap land, and the healthy activities of agriculture,
these colonies were able to double the population every twenty-five years—a paradise,
indeed. “These facts,” writes Malthus, “seem to shew that population increases exactly in
the proportion that the two great checks to it, misery and vice, are removed, and that there
is not a truer criterion of the happiness and innocence of a people than the rapidity of
their increase.”[80] Or, as he puts it a little earlier:
In a state therefore of great equality and virtue, where pure and simple manners prevailed, and where the
means of subsistence were so abundant that no part of the society could have any fears about providing
amply for a family, the power of population being left to exert itself unchecked, the increase of the human
species would evidently be much greater than any increase that has been hitherto known.[81]
The true mark of happiness is then the unrestricted growth of population, where the food
produced is able to keep up with that growth. However, this happiness is precisely the
cause of its own undoing—a dialectical trap contained within what is essentially good.
The vast reservoir of food cannot forever keep up with a burgeoning population; soon
enough, it begins to run short, even with the use of better agricultural techniques.
Malthus fast-forwards by crossing the Atlantic back to England, thereby predicting the


troubles soon to face North America. Here, the want of room and food—together with the
unwholesome towns to which people are drawn for work—lead to the double traps of
misery and vice. The population must be checked (usually in brutal fashion) by famine,
war, starvation, or by the wariness of people to produce more children.
At this point, we return to the critiques of Godwin that seek to show how any Eden,
whether of North America or of the imagination of Godwin, must inevitably come
undone. Like a prophet of doom who gains perverse pleasure from repeating his
predictions of dire events to come, Malthus tells not one but two grim stories in reply to
Godwin. The plot of each may be stated succinctly:
When these two fundamental laws of society, the security of property, and the institution of marriage, were
once established, inequality of conditions must necessarily follow.
 
It has appeared that a society constituted according to Mr Godwin’s system must, from the inevitable
laws of our nature, degenerate into a class of proprietors and a class of labourers.[82]
On three counts, life becomes worse: in relation to property, to marriage, and to labor.
One may desire a society—whether a golden age in the past or a utopia to come—with
property in common, the free availability of sex, and without the need for labor. Dream
on, says Malthus, wagging his finger. For instance, free sex without the constraints of
marriage would soon lead to unwelcome situations, such as broods of children roaming
the earth seeking scarce food. With no recognizable fathers to provide for them, women
—or perhaps society at large—would be left to care for them (not to mention the shame
that attends women in this condition—Malthus cannot quite free himself from his
prudish assumptions). Before long, men would realize they needed to care for their wives
and children. Laws of marriage would follow so that the men could ensure that their
children had sufficient food and their vulnerable wives could be protected even if they are
subservient to their husbands. Readers familiar with the story of the Fall will immediately
detect the presence of the curse to Eve: “your desire shall be for your man, and he shall
rule over you” (Gen. 3:16, our translation).
Or take property: it is all very well to have property in common, but soon enough the
inveterate greed of human beings would lead to theft, especially as food becomes scarce
and people begin to hoard it. Measures would need to be instituted for the sake of public
safety (measures that one happens to find in “civilized” societies of the present). These
include the clear demarcation of land as private property and ensuring the inviolability
of every one’s property. Malthus imagines a council of wise, sober leaders who suggest
precisely this solution. Yet with this account, he swiftly tosses out the hard-earned


conclusion of Locke. Property is no longer the natural outcome of God’s command to
subdue the earth but a direct outcome of the Fall (Gen. 3:17-19).
Or take labor: it may indeed be desirable to have no need for labor, with the whole
earth and its resources allocated equally to all. However, consider for a moment what
happens to the children of those to whom it is allocated. There would hardly be enough
to go around once the population increased. Some people would inevitably starve: “It has
appeared, that from the inevitable laws of our nature some human beings must suffer
from want,” opines Malthus. Indeed, these “are the unhappy persons who, in the great
lottery of life, have drawn a blank.”[83] Naturally, some people would be able to
appropriate more, some less. In this situation, it would—naturally—be far better if those
with nothing had the opportunity to work for a pittance. The poor man has no property
but his labor, so that is all he has to sell. But at least he would be able to have some access
to the surplus of the proprietors, thereby surviving rather than starving.[84] This is a
rather grim account of the origins of labor, as also its division into classes. Not only does
he thoroughly undermine his hollow and solitary myth of progress, as well as his
suggestion that labor is the result of divine Providence, but he also spectacularly reasserts
the biblical narrative of the Fall. The back-breaking labor of producing food is, like
property, a punishment for disobedience.
This is an impressive achievement, for three of the six curses of Gen. 3:14-19 have
been returned to economic analysis. Only the amputated limbs of the snake, its enmity
with the seed of the woman, and the woman’s pain in childbirth have been left aside—
although one assumes that had Malthus found a way to include them, he would have
done so. But is this outcome an improvement? Faithful to the dominant ideological
position of the biblical narrative, Malthus is clear that it is not. Initially, he suggests that
this outcome is the lesser of two evils, an evil that bears “no comparison to the black train
of distresses that would inevitably be occasioned by the insecurity of property.”[85]
However, he goes a step further when it comes to the division of labor and the
inequalities of class:
It should be observed that the principal argument of this Essay only goes to prove the necessity of a class of
proprietors, and a class of labourers, but by no means infers that the present great inequality of property is
either necessary or useful to society. On the contrary, it must certainly be considered as an evil, and every
institution that promotes it is essentially bad and impolitic.[86]
Evil, bad, impolitic—it is clearly less than desirable. Malthus is obviously rather taken
with this proposal, repeating it on a number of occasions.[87] Yet, the repetitions do
advance his position in a crucial direction. Let us quote him again:


And thus it appears, that a society constituted according to the most beautiful form that imagination can
conceive, with benevolence for its moving principle, instead of self-love, and with every evil disposition in
all its members corrected by reason and not force, would, from the inevitable laws of nature, and not from
any original depravity of man, in a very short period degenerate into a society constructed upon a plan not
essentially different from that which prevails in every known state at present; I mean, a society divided into a
class of proprietors, and a class of labourers, and with self-love the main-spring of the great machine.[88]
Even the most Edenic form of society, the most beautiful form that imagination can
conceive, would soon fall into a far lesser state. This is a society of class differences, of
haves and have-nots, of capitalists and laborers—all driven by the curse of self-interest—
precisely the society we have now! England is no better than any other modern state; all
share the same dire situation.[89] Here is the flaw in the crystal: equality leads inevitably
to inequality; freedom to unfreedom; happiness to unhappiness. The perpetual dialectic
of progressive and retrograde movements continues,[90] and the narrative of the Fall
has the last, grim chuckle.
Conclusion: On Good and Evil
Being a staunch member of the Established Church of England [. . .].[91]
W
e suggested at the beginning that Malthus is a clear example of a more theological
direction out of the work of Adam Smith and troubles a now outmoded narrative of
secularization. On the latter point, we suggest a more dialectical approach to the relation
between secularization and religion, one that derives ultimately from Marx’s observation
concerning the secular state. For Marx, that state is actually the fullest realization of the
Christian state, for the contradictions of the latter lead to the futile effort of resolving
those contradictions in the secular state.[92] This yields two implications for Malthus.
First, Malthus’s overtly theological reading presents one dialectical outcome of the drive
to distance economic theory from the Bible and theology, for the two sides are
inseparable. The second implication presents a more conflicted view of what may be
called phases (or bursts) of secularization and then religion,[93] which is germane to a
particular W
estern history of the tense relationship between the two.
W
e return to this issue in the conclusion to the book, but here, we would like to deal
with two final matters—universals and the dialectic of good and evil. Earlier, we noted
the curious tendency of Malthus (and other classical economists) to speak of laws. W
e
suggest that—apart from seeking to bolster shaky proposals—recourse to the
terminology of laws indicates a universalizing move. The myths do the same, projecting
grand stories of human development according to the same capitalist criteria as they see


operating in their own day. The implication is that all human beings are capitalists at
heart, operating according to invariable and (for Malthus) divinely ordained “laws.” In
these efforts at universalizing lie yet more seeds of the economics imperialism that
plagues economic analysis today.
W
e close with an implication of Malthus’s argument that he seems unwilling to
pursue. At various points, we have emphasized what may be called a dialectic of good
and evil, in which goodness itself leads to evil. It may be God’s gift of sexual desire that
leads to overpopulation and thereby misery and vice. It may be the bleak view of human
nature, according to which we are fallen creatures, torn between lust and hunger, and
with misery and vice as our lot. It may be the divinely ordained laws of nature that cause
some to suffer more than others, bringing about a “partial evil.” It may be the institutions
of modern society that seek to protect property, the partners and children in marriage, or
to ensure class distinctions. The theological implication is that evil itself may be the
outcome of God’s goodness—that God is responsible for both good and evil. Gone is
any notion of an evil being, a Satan, or even free will as the cause of evil (Malthus barely
contemplates free will, except fleetingly for the rational man). He is left with a deeply
biblical and often unpalatable conclusion that the good God is not always so good.
However, we would like to read this position in another way: it enables a robust doctrine
of evil, a doctrine that is missing from most classical and neoclassical economists, let
alone the historical materialist tradition in which we are interested. For the former, the
naïve proposal that human beings seek their own advantage by whatever means possible
collapses before the reality that we more often opt for what is to our detriment. Evil is
often as stronger than the good, undermining the best laid plans and highest hopes. As
for historical materialism—if such a political project does not account for the power of
evil, it will be forced to do so at some point, often to its own detriment.
1. Thomas Robert Malthus, An Essay on the Principle of Population (London: J. Johnston in St. Paul's Church-
Yard, 1798), 60.
2. Ricardo would pursue the latter, arguing for an even more unbridled form of capitalist accumulation.
3. Malthus, An Essay on the Principle of Population, 44, 60.
4. Ibid., 105.
5. Ibid., 87; Thomas Robert Malthus, Principles of Political Economy Considered with a View to Their Practical
Application (Boston: Wells and Lilly, 1821), 336–38. Waterman makes this the main drive of Malthus’s
infamous essay on population, targeted against supposed Jacobin radicals, such as Godwin. While helpful to
a certain extent, it neglects the fact that this idea was still very much within the circles of ruling class
intellectuals, a context that Waterman buys into without criticism. The real radicals among the working poor
never gain a voice. Anthony Waterman, Revolution, Economics and Religion: Christian Political Economy,
1798–1833 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1991).


6. While Foley’s point that Malthus was skeptical of unbridled laissez-faire is well taken, he fails to see the
sharpness of his theological position. Foley, Adam's Fallacy: A Guide to Economic Theology, 45–55.
7. Thomas Robert Malthus, An Essay on the Principle of Population, or a View of Its Past and Present Effects on
Human Happiness; with an Inquiry Into Our Prospects Respecting the Future Removal or Mitigation of the Evils
which It Occasions, 2nd ed. (London: Johnson, 1803); Thomas Robert Malthus, An Essay on the Principle of
Population, or a View of Its Past and Present Effects on Human Happiness; with an Inquiry Into Our Prospects
Respecting the Future Removal or Mitigation of the Evils which It Occasions, 3rd ed. (London: Johnson, 1806);
Thomas Robert Malthus, An Essay on the Principle of Population, or a View of Its Past and Present Effects on
Human Happiness; with an Inquiry Into Our Prospects Respecting the Future Removal or Mitigation of the Evils
which It Occasions, 4th ed. (London: Johnson, 1807); Thomas Robert Malthus, An Essay on the Principle of
Population, or a View of Its Past and Present Effects on Human Happiness; with an Inquiry Into Our Prospects
Respecting the Future Removal or Mitigation of the Evils which It Occasions, 5th ed. (London: Hunter, 1817);
Thomas Robert Malthus, An Essay on the Principle of Population, or a View of Its Past and Present Effects on
Human Happiness; with an Inquiry Into Our Prospects Respecting the Future Removal or Mitigation of the Evils
which It Occasions, 6th ed. (London: Hunter, 1826).
8. The effort by some to negate Malthus’s consistent theological concerns in favor of a utilitarian perspective is
particularly unpersuasive. Salim Rashid, “Malthus' Theology: An Overlooked Letter and Some
Comments,” History of Political Economy 16, no. 1 (1984): 135–38; Lionel Charles Robbins, The Theory of
Economic Policy in English Classical Political Economy (London: Macmillan, 1952); Samuel Hollander, The
Economics of Thomas Robert Malthus (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1997). By comparison, others
recognize the centrality of theology in his work. Donald Winch, “Higher Maxims: Happiness Versus Wealth
in Malthus and Ricardo,” in That Noble Science of Politics: A Study in Nineteenth-Century Intellectual History,
eds. Stefan Collini, Donald Winch, and John Burrow, 63–90 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1983); Donald Winch, Malthus (New York: Oxford University Press, 1987); Donald Winch, “Robert
Malthus: Christian Moral Scientist, Arch-Demoralizer or Implicit Secular Utilitarian?” Utilitas 5, no. 2
(1993): 239–53; J. M. Pullen, “Malthus' Theological Ideas and Their Influence on His Principle of
Population,” History of Political Economy 13 (1981): 39–54.
9. Malthus, An Essay on the Principle of Population, 66.
10. Ibid., 20, 39.
11. “It is to the established administration of property and to the apparently narrow principle of self-love that we
are indebted for all the noblest exertions of human genius, all the finer and more delicate emotions of the
soul, for everything, indeed, that distinguishes the civilized from the savage state.” Ibid., 91; see also
Malthus, Principles of Political Economy Considered with a View to Their Practical Application, 2.
12. Thomas Robert Malthus, The Unpublished Papers in the Collection of the Kanto Gakuen University, eds. John
Pullen and Trevor Hughes Parry, vol. 2 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004), 4.
13. Malthus, An Essay on the Principle of Population, 57.
14. Ibid., 65. Note also: “The mighty law of self-preservation expels all the softer and more exalted emotions of
the soul . . . The corn is plucked before it is ripe, or secreted in unfair proportions, and the whole black train
of vices that belong to falsehood are immediately generated. Provisions no longer flow in for the support of
the mother with a large family. The children are sickly from insufficient food. The rosy flush of health gives
place to the pallid cheek and hollow eye of misery. Benevolence, yet lingering in a few bosoms, makes some
faint expiring struggles, till at length self-love resumes his wonted empire and lords it triumphant over the
world.” Ibid., 60; see also 62, 64, 65, 91, 93.
15. Ibid., 111.
16. On Malthus’s career in the church, see Waterman, Revolution, Economics and Religion: Christian Political
Economy, 1798–1833, 83–87. Waterman erroneously claims: “Save for the last two chapters of the first Essay


no other writing by Malthus attests to any special interest in or competence at theology. Unlike others
among his clerical colleagues at the East India College he published no volume of sermons.” Ibid., 96.
17. Malthus links the legal notion of ransom with propitiatory sacrifice, citing Matt. 20:28, Mark 10:45, and 1
Tim. 2:6.
18. Malthus, The Unpublished Papers in the Collection of the Kanto Gakuen University, vol. 2, 12.
19. Matt. 26:28 and 1 John 2:1–2, quoted by Malthus, The Unpublished Papers in the Collection of the Kanto
Gakuen University, vol. 2, 13.
20. Ibid., vol. 2, 13–14.
21. Malthus, An Essay on the Principle of Population, 20, 56; see also 80, 84.
22. Malthus is not always consistent. Elsewhere, he takes a much weaker line, suggesting that evil and sin act as
trials or spurs to human action, action that may well lead to the betterment of the human condition. Without
such spurs, people would languish in torpor and laziness. Ibid., 111, 113.
23. Malthus, The Unpublished Papers in the Collection of the Kanto Gakuen University, vol. 2, 10–11, 15, 23–24.
24. “It is not easy to conceive in what manner the attention of mankind could be so strongly and so constantly
directed to the evil of sin and disobedience as by the conviction that the almighty God has thought it
necessary that his only begotten Son, should take our nature upon him, and suffer death upon the Cross, in
order to avert those consequences which would otherwise naturally and unavoidably have followed as the
wages of sin.” Ibid., vol. 2, 15.
25. Ibid., vol. 2, 17.
26. Pullen, “Malthus' Theological Ideas and Their Influence on His Principle of Population.” A sermon such as
this renders efforts to see Malthus as an optimist somewhat empty. Hollander, The Economics of Thomas
Robert Malthus, 880–81, 917–48.
27. Malthus, An Essay on the Principle of Population, 31.
28. Ibid., 11; see also 5, 9, 31.
29. If interested, one may seek the meaning of these terms elsewhere. It is not clear whether Malthus had such
refined activities in mind, but they fit his category of vice.
30. Marquis de Condorcet, Esquisse d’un tableau historique des progrès de l’esprit humain (Paris: Masson et fils,
1795); William Godwin, An Enquiry concerning Political Justice, and its Influence on General Virtue and Happiness
(London: G. G. & J. Robinson, 1793).
31. Edward P
. Thompson, The Making of the English W
orking Class, 2nd ed. (New York: Vintage, 1966).
Waterman’s otherwise useful work makes the mistake of assuming this ruling class context and seeing the
liberal reformers as “revolutionary.” Waterman, Revolution, Economics and Religion: Christian Political Economy,
1798–1833.
32. Malthus, An Essay on the Principle of Population, 45–95.
33. Ibid., 55.
34. Ibid., 84.
35. Perhaps even six, if we include the brief reiteration of Smith’s foundation myth in Malthus’s Principles of
Political Economy. However, given its derivative nature, we prefer to focus on the versions in the essay on
population. Malthus, Principles of Political Economy Considered with a View to Their Practical Application, 41-43,
51.
36. Malthus, An Essay on the Principle of Population, 113.
37. Ibid., 12–22.
38. Ibid., 13.
39. Ibid., 13.
40. Alongside North America, the reader finds frequent comparisons and productions of the ethnic other in
Central and South America, Greece, Spain, Portugal, Holland, and China. Ibid., 6–7, 12–13, 18–19, 31–33,


41, 101–2. In the later editions of the essay, expanded to three volumes, ethnocentrism is exacerbated, with
attempted surveys of “checks to population” among the “lowest stages of human society,” including the
North American “Indians,” the Pacific Islands, Africa, Siberia, Turkestan, “Indostan,” Persia, Tibet, China,
and the “nations” of Europe. See also Malthus, Principles of Political Economy Considered with a View to Their
Practical Application, 191, 278, 294–310. This chronic ethnocentrism is simply ignored in works on Malthus.
For examples, see Hollander, The Economics of Thomas Robert Malthus; Waterman, Revolution, Economics and
Religion: Christian Political Economy, 1798–1833. 
41. Malthus, An Essay on the Principle of Population, 13–14.
42. Ibid., 15.
43. Ibid., 19.
44. Ibid., 21–22.
45. Ibid., 80.
46. Ibid., 4; see also 44.
47. Ibid., 6.
48. Ibid., 40.
49. Ibid., 4.
50. Ibid., 67.
51. Ibid., 68.
52. Ibid., 58, 62–63.
53. In his very effort to frame what he calls a law of necessity, Malthus indicates the real power of the need for
food: “The increase of the human species can only be kept commensurate to the increase of the means of
subsistence by the constant operation of the strong law of necessity acting as a check upon the greater
power.” Ibid., 8.
54. Ibid., vii, 5.
55. Ibid., 32–44.
56. “In the present state of society, other considerations occur. Will he not lower his rank in life? Will he not
subject himself to greater difficulties than he at present feels? Will he not be obliged to labour harder? And if
he has a large family, will his utmost exertions enable him to support them? May he not see his offspring in
rags and misery, and clamouring for bread that he cannot give them? And may he not be reduced to the
grating necessity of forfeiting his independence, and of being obliged to the sparing hand of charity for
support?” Ibid., 8–9.
57. Ibid., 44.
58. Ibid., 29.
59. Mandeville, The Fable of the Bees: Or, Private Vices, Public Benefits (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1924
[1729]).
60. Hollander, The Economics of Thomas Robert Malthus, 928–29.
61. Malthus, An Essay on the Principle of Population, as it Affects the Future Improvement of Society with Remarks on
the Speculations of Mr. Godwin, M. Condorcet, and Other Writers; Malthus, An Essay on the Principle of
Population, or a View of Its Past and Present Effects on Human Happiness; with an Inquiry Into Our Prospects
Respecting the Future Removal or Mitigation of the Evils which It Occasions, 2nd ed.; Malthus, An Essay on the
Principle of Population, or a View of Its Past and Present Effects on Human Happiness; with an Inquiry Into Our
Prospects Respecting the Future Removal or Mitigation of the Evils which It Occasions, 3rd ed.; Malthus, An Essay
on the Principle of Population, or a View of Its Past and Present Effects on Human Happiness; with an Inquiry Into
Our Prospects Respecting the Future Removal or Mitigation of the Evils which It Occasions, 4th ed.; Malthus, An
Essay on the Principle of Population, or a View of Its Past and Present Effects on Human Happiness; with an
Inquiry Into Our Prospects Respecting the Future Removal or Mitigation of the Evils which It Occasions, 5th ed.;


Malthus, An Essay on the Principle of Population, or a View of Its Past and Present Effects on Human Happiness;
with an Inquiry Into Our Prospects Respecting the Future Removal or Mitigation of the Evils which It Occasions, 6th
ed.
62. Malthus, An Essay on the Principle of Population, 11, 18. 
63. Ibid., 9–10, 98, 101, 103–5.
64. Ibid., 56.
65. Ibid., 112.
66. For Malthus, the only result of such measures is to increase poverty. Malthus, An Essay on the Principle of
Population, 24–38, 46–47. Adam Smith and David Ricardo follow the same line, which reads very much like
the free market advocates in our own day, who oppose welfare on the same grounds. Elsewhere, Malthus
opines that the danger of distributing the wealth of the rich among the poor would result in the inveterate
laziness of the poor manifesting itself once again. Ibid., 92. Give them a little extra, and they spend it on
drink: “Even when they have an opportunity of saving they seldom exercise it, but all that is beyond their
present necessities goes, generally speaking, to the ale-house . . . It is a general complaint among master
manufacturers that high wages ruin all their workmen, but it is difficult to conceive that these men would
not save a part of their high wages for the future support of their families, instead of spending it in
drunkenness and dissipation.” Ibid., 27–28. As Marx notes, “The parson Malthus . . . reduces the worker to a
beast of burden ‘for the sake of production’ and even condemns him to death from starvation and to
celibacy.” Karl Marx, Economic Manuscript of 1861–63 (Continuation): A Contribution to the Critique of Political
Economy, in Marx and Engels Collected W
orks, vol. 31 (Moscow: Progress Publishers, 1863 [1988]), 349.
67. Malthus, An Essay on the Principle of Population, 113.
68. Momentarily, the Garden of Eden has almost slipped from the picture, becoming an item of mere
speculation: “The Supreme Creator might, undoubtedly, raise up plants of all kinds, for the use of his
creatures, without the assistance of those little bits of matter, which we call seed, or even without the
assisting labour and attention of man.” Ibid., 113–14.
69. Ibid., 114.
70. Ibid., 115.
71. Ibid., 114.
72. Ibid., 115.
73. Ibid., 116.
74. William Paley, James Paxton, and John Ware, Natural Theology (Boston: Gould and Lincoln, 1854).
75. Pullen, “Malthus' Theological Ideas and Their Influence on His Principle of Population”; Waterman,
Revolution, Economics and Religion: Christian Political Economy, 1798–1833, 58–150; Winch, “Higher
Maxims: Happiness versus Wealth in Malthus and Ricardo”; Winch, Malthus; Winch, “Robert Malthus:
Christian Moral Scientist, Arch-Demoralizer or Implicit Secular Utilitarian?”; Hollander, The Economics of
Thomas Robert Malthus, 921–48. Hollander suggests that Malthus was at heart a “theological utilitarian” of
the same ilk as John Gay, Francis Hutcheson, Thomas Rutherford, and William Paley. The true source of
virtue, they argued, was to appeal to “man’s” selfishness, including the idea of rewards in heaven, for “man”
was certainly not virtuous in and of himself. See also Viner, The Role of Providence in the Social Order: An
Essay in Intellectual History, 70–75.
76. Malthus, An Essay on the Principle of Population, 91–92.
77. Ibid., 33–35, 61–65, 91–94.
78. Locke, T
wo T
reatises of Government and A Letter Concerning T
oleration, 2.49.
79. For Malthus, the only comparable situation in old societies occurs after the devastation of pestilence, war, or
natural disaster. The population may be drastically reduced, but this enables them to take on paradise-like

## Notas Relacionadas
- [[50 VIDA SAUDAVEL/confiança]]
  - **Similaridade:** 100.0%
  - **Trecho do capítulo:** _4  
A Luxúria e a Fome de Thomas Malthus  
As tentações para o mal são fortes demais para que a natureza humana resista._
  - **Trecho da nota:** _Segundo lencioni2015, é a certeza de que todos estão bem intencionados em um time._
- [[80 COMUNIDADE/O que e necessario ao estudo]]
  - **Similaridade:** 100.0%
  - **Trecho do capítulo:** _De acordo com essa narrativa, a teoria econômica clássica ganhou seu espaço ao se afastar da curiosa interação com a Bíblia e a teologia que encontram..._
  - **Trecho da nota:** _- uma terra estrangeira	
- a disciplina._
- [[50 VIDA SAUDAVEL/melhorar um pouco todo dia faz um prédio na longa caminhada]]
  - **Similaridade:** 100.0%
  - **Trecho do capítulo:** _Já traçamos a tensão entre as duas linhas de enredo em relação a Locke, mas com Malthus o retrocesso eclipsa o progresso—e isso com um tom decididamen..._
  - **Trecho da nota:** _Note | Location: 342
- O impacto criado por uma mudança em seus hábitos é semelhante ao efeito de mudar a rota de um avião em apenas alguns graus._
- [[40 COMO CONHECEMOS/Kintsugi]]
  - **Similaridade:** 100.0%
  - **Trecho do capítulo:** _No entanto, não estamos interessados nessa teoria da expiação como tal (uma entre várias abordagens possíveis sobre a morte e ressurreição de Cristo),..._
  - **Trecho da nota:** _Essa abordagem cultural poderia ser incorporada à prática de contar histórias, incentivando narradores a valorizar as experiências autênticas e imperf..._
- [[40 COMO CONHECEMOS/Divisões da filosofia]]
  - **Similaridade:** 100.0%
  - **Trecho do capítulo:** _Focamos na primeira edição, uma vez que nas cinco edições posteriores Malthus desesperadamente recuou das implicações drásticas da primeira.[7] Neste ..._
  - **Trecho da nota:** _- argumentação demonstrativa
		- provável
			- dialética
			- retórica._

---
*Processado automaticamente em: 2026-02-27 17:22*
