Efesios 1:20-23

Ef 1:20-23

o qual exerceu ele em Cristo, ressuscitando-o dentre os mortos e fazendo-o sentar à sua direita nos lugares celestiais, acima de todo principado, e potestade, e poder, e domínio, e de todo nome que se possa referir, não só no presente século, mas também no vindouro. E pôs todas as coisas debaixo dos pés, e para ser o cabeça sobre todas as coisas, o deu à igreja, a qual é o seu corpo, a plenitude daquele que a tudo enche em todas as coisas.

The Message:

Toda essa força vem de Cristo. Deus o levantou da morte e o estabeleceu num trono, nos altos céus, no governo do Universo — tudo, das galáxias aos planetas, de forma que nenhum nome, nenhum poder está fora do alcance de sua soberania. E isso não é provisório: será assim para sempre. Ele está no comando de tudo e tem a palavra final a respeito de tudo. No centro de tudo, Cristo governa a igreja. A igreja não é periférica em relação ao mundo, o mundo é que é periférico em relação à igreja. A igreja é o corpo de Cristo. Por esse corpo ele fala, age e preenche tudo com sua presença.

1 Coríntios 15:24-28

E, então, virá o fim, quando ele entregar o reino ao Deus e Pai, quando houver destruído todo principado, bem como toda potestade e poder. Porque convém que ele reine até que haja posto todos os inimigos debaixo dos pés. O último inimigo a ser destruído é a morte. Porque todas as coisas sujeitou debaixo dos pés. E, quando diz que todas as coisas lhe estão sujeitas, certamente, exclui aquele que tudo lhe subordinou. Quando, porém, todas as coisas lhe estiverem sujeitas, então, o próprio Filho também se sujeitará àquele que todas as coisas lhe sujeitou, para que Deus seja tudo em todos.

NIV comentario

The powers (1:21 - 22a). The five categories of powers mentioned in 1:21 — “rule,” “authority,” “power,” “dominion,” and “title” — are a stacking of terms to emphasize that Christ’s victory over them is total. No certain conclusions can be drawn about distinctions between these terms, and no hierarchy of the powers is in mind

The powers (1:21 - 22a). The five categories of powers mentioned in 1:21 — “rule,” “authority,” “power,” “dominion,” and “title” — are a stacking of terms to emphasize that Christ’s victory over them is total. No certain conclusions can be drawn about distinctions between these terms, and no hierarchy of the powers is in mind

Christ, church, body (1:22b - 23). The statement that “God placed all things under [Christ’s] feet” (1:22) leads naturally to the thought of Christ as “head” and to the image of the body. The second half of 1:22 emphasizes that Christ is “head over everything for the church.” While the idea could be “head over all things in relation to the church,” the niv translation is surely correct. ***The point is that Christ is head of all things for the benefit of the church. The church is in a position of privilege because Jesus Christ is Lord (cf. also Col. 1:15 - 20).***

***
***

The main point is that Jesus’ position as “head” stresses that he is Lord; the image of the “body” stresses his unity with believers and their unity with each other.

Fullness,” in other words, refers to God’s making his presence and power felt. Whereas in the Old Testament he filled the temple, now he fills Christ, and Christ in turn fills his own so that the church partakes of the divine fullness. The focus is on the gift of God’s own being in revelation and salvation.

On the one hand, our “scientific” worldview rejects any belief in spiritual beings, demons, angels, and the like. On the other hand, much of our society still is superstitious, accepts astrology, and is fascinated with thought about spiritual beings. The “psychic network” is a multimillion dollar industry. The recent influence of the new age movement has made language about “spirit guides” and angels common. Right in the middle of our “scientific” culture, major news magazines and television series focus on angels. In most cases, however, despite movies about demon possession, our culture focuses only on positive spiritual powers. Our society does not fear spiritual forces or blame them for things that go wrong; rather, it looks to them for assistance and good luck.

Because no other power can rival him, and because in him the fullness of God lives, Christians do not have to look elsewhere to find what they need for life. What they need is in Christ. This power, however, is not power in the abstract; it is relational power— power that is known because of being bound to the one in whom power resides.

The theology here is precisely that announced in Romans 8:31 - 39: God’s power does not remove us from persecution, danger, difficulty, and death, but makes us more than conquerors in all such things. This is not a power to work magic and escape difficulty, but a power to live in an evil world. This power is for godly living. Much of the letter will address these issues and the change that God produces in his people. This is where application of the discussion of power must focus.

Preaching the world

Just as the cross is the highest display of God’s love, so the Resurrection is the ultimate display of his power.