Efésios 1:15-19

Efésios 1:15-19

Por isso, também eu, tendo ouvido

- a fé que há entre vós no Senhor Jesus
- e o amor para com todos os santos,

não cesso de dar graças por vós, fazendo menção de vós nas minhas orações, para que o Deus de nosso Senhor Jesus Cristo, o Pai da glória, vos conceda

- espírito de sabedoria e de revelação no pleno conhecimento dele,
- iluminados os olhos do vosso coração,

para saberdes
	- qual é a [[Esperança]] do seu chamamento,
    - qual a riqueza da glória da sua herança nos santos e
    - qual a suprema grandeza do seu poder para com os que cremos, segundo a eficácia da força do seu poder;

The way God has worked to accomplish salvation motivates both Paul’s praise and his intercession. The intent of this prayer is that people will know in their own lives the benefits mentioned in the doxology.

Despite the grammatical difficulties, Paul’s intent is clear — that God’s Spirit, already given to his readers, will continually give wisdom and revelation for life and understanding. The result is that the “inner eyes,” the instruments of sight and understanding for the inner being, will receive light by which to see. In other words, the apostle prays the lights will go on inside people so that they know God and understand the benefit of the gospel.

the wealth of the glory” is more than either of these ideas. Paul points to the tremendous glory that is present when God inherits the people he has set apart for himself. It is the Father’s inheritance that Paul refers to, not that of believers (cf. 1:14). “In the saints” means that the inheritance is found in, or consists of, these people. The revelation of who God really is and enjoyment of him will take place when God inherits his own people. His glory will then be made manifest

statistically Ephesians focuses on words for power more than any other New Testament letter. In verse 19 alone four different words for power occur, emphasizing God’s activity in people’s lives. Here the apostle emphasizes what God’s power has accomplished in the resurrection of Christ and in his exaltation to God’s right hand. Paul desires that believers will know this great power is available for them.

Significantly, the focus on God’s power here is not on God’s inherent power or on some cosmic display of force. Rather, it is on God’s life-giving power as it is specifically available for believers. In this way the prayer looks back to the emphasis in the doxology on God’s activity of planning and working for us and our salvation

Paul’s prayer in 1:15 - 20 is directly relevant and easily appropriated — as relevant for us now as it was when it was first written. It reveals both a conviction about the importance of prayer and a commitment to other believers

Like the doxology in 1:3 - 14, Paul’s prayer is theocentric and Trinitarian. His understanding of God and of God’s actions is the basis of his prayer and shows through in his prayer. True prayer is always this way; it expresses a theology and therefore requires careful reflection and meditation on the kind of God to whom we are praying

Hope was as rare a commodity in the first-century world Paul addressed as it is today. Fate, determinism, and despair dominated the ancient world. People had little hope of being able to better their situation

-============ preaching the world

To truly know another, there must be mutual knowledge and a mutual exchange. And knowing Christ goes even beyond this. The word “know” here has an Old Testament heritage behind it in which the word yada often expressed sexual intimacy — “Adam knew Eve his wife; and she conceived, and bore Cain” (Genesis 4:1, KJV). It is the spiritual parallel of this that Jesus has in mind in describing those who have eternal life.

The great need of any church, whether it is healthy or not, is knowing Christ — an epignosis — a better, deeper, fuller knowledge of Christ. That is the key to all of life. We ought to read the Scriptures with an eye to knowing him. We ought to listen to preaching with this in mind. We ought to pray this for the Church and ourselves, for it is an apostolic, Spirit-ordained prayer.

We don’t need more truth or better truth (impossible!). We simply need our spiritual eyes opened to the truths that surround us.

What we must see is that the power that raised Jesus from the dead can bear directly on our lives now and at his appearing. This stupendous power changes us from children of Hell to children of God and gives us practical victory over sin in our lives.