Nota Sem Título

Ef 6:1 — Ef 6:4
Deuteronômio 5:16

Honra a teu pai e a tua mãe, como o SENHOR, teu Deus, te ordenou, para que se prolonguem os teus dias e para que te vá bem na terra que o SENHOR, teu Deus, te

6​ Filhos,

- **obedecei** a vossos pais (pai e mãe) no Senhor,
    - pois isto é justo.
- **Honra** a teu pai e a tua mãe (que é o primeiro mandamento com promessa),
    - para que te vá bem,
    - e sejas de longa vida sobre a terra.

E vós, pais (pater, masculino),

- **não provoqueis** vossos filhos à ira,
- mas **criai-os**
    - na disciplina (do Senhor)
    - e na admoestação do Senhor.

regarding children, several of Jesus’ sayings placed allegiance to him over allegiance to the family. See Matthew 10:21, 34 - 37; 12:46 - 50; 19:27 - 29; Luke 9:57 - 62; 14:26.

Paul also placed restrictions on the husbands/fathers/masters and instructed them about their responsibilities in the light of the gospel. He assumed the cultural framework about authority and then subjected it to reorganization by a higher commitment to Christ.

children and slaves had even less status than women. All relations in the house codes are redefined by relation to Christ.

Paul never argues merely ethically, even if his ethical conclusions might be the same as his society’s. Instead, he argues theologically from a Christian framework. That children should obey their parents was a given in his society, but for him it was “right” because of their relation to Christ.

God’s promise is based on the presumption that obedience to parents leads to order and stability. This promise applies to the community and is not a guarantee to the individual. This passage should not be spiritualized to refer to future life

Leon Morris is probably correct in saying it is significant that Paul wrote “children” instead of “boys.” Girls were valued less in ancient society, but Paul did not accept such a limitation.

========:==:

This is the essence of biblical parenting: not acquiescing to our children’s demands, but serving their ultimate need to live as God requires.

Parents honor God when by a compassionate embrace or a controlled discipline they cultivate or correct the spiritual development of their children.

Especially when my wife and I were first-time parents, we took many cues about raising our children from other couples in the church whose families we respected.

Igreja, lugar de aprendizado mútuo

Paul assumes that in order for us to be good parents we must have a solid understanding of our relationship with our heavenly Father

How can we hope to raise our children well if our own models are broken? The words of the apostle rescue every Christian parent from hopelessness by reminding us we are all on the positive side of the parental-model equation. ***Our Father is the Lord***.

The reality of the heavenly Father’s love can be more real, more powerful, and more motivating than biology and learned behavior. For this reason, an intimate relationship with him does more to establish what we will be as parents than any other single fact in our existence or background

When Paul says that God has been a Father to us since before the foundation of the world, the apostle directly reinforces the security we must have in order to be effective Christian parents

Our security in our relationship with God frees us to parent for our children’s good rather than for our own—giving to them our security rather than taking it from them (Eph. 5:2)

My relationship with my wife should so confirm her personal security with the Lord that she can afford to do what is best for our children even if that action threatens her sense of need for a child’s acceptance. My wife’s relationship with me should be such a reinforcement of my own security with the Lord that I do not need to discipline my children for my sake.

biblical childrearing is built on a healthy relationship between a husband and wife

As the parents make Christ real to each other, they also teach the child what intimacy with the Lord means

A parent who pours affection and attention into children at the expense of honoring a spouse may seem to be serving the children, but such priorities actually jeopardize the ultimate welfare of the children

============