Forte Labs. “How To Take Smart Notes: 10 Principles to Revolutionize Your Note-Taking and Writing”, 4 de fevereiro de 2020. https://fortelabs.co/blog/how-to-take-smart-notes/.

[[aprendizado]]

# Principle #1: Writing is not the outcome of thinking; it is the medium in which thinking takes place
- If you want to learn and remember something long-term, you have to write it down. If you want to understand an idea, you have to translate it into your own words

# Principle #2: Do your work as if writing is the only thing that matters
- Work as if writing is the only thing that matters. Having a clear, tangible purpose when you consume information completely changes the way you engage with it
- [[Deliberate practice]] is the best way to get better at anything, and in this case, you are deliberately practicing the most fundamental skill of all: thinking

# Principle #3: Nobody ever starts from scratch

# Principle #4: Our tools and techniques are only as valuable as the workflow

# Principle #5: Standardization enables creativity

# Principle #6: Our work only gets better when exposed to high-quality feedback 
- notes are the only kind of feedback that is available anytime you need it. It is the only way to deliberately practice your thinking and communication skills multiple times per day
- [[Escrevendo]]

# Principle #7: Work on multiple, simultaneous projects

# Principle #8: Organize your notes by context, not by topic 
- Instead of organizing by topic and subtopic, it is much more effective to organize by context. Specifically, the context in which it will be used. The primary question when deciding where to put something becomes “In which context will I want to stumble upon this again?” A writer asks “In which circumstances will I want to stumble upon this note?”

# Principle #9: Always follow the most interesting path
- we must spend as much time as possible working on things we find interesting
- Plans are meant to help us feel in control. But it is much more important to actually _be_ in control, which means being able to steer our work towards what we consider interesting and relevant
- “When people experienced a sense of autonomy with regard to the choice [of what to work on], their energy for subsequent tasks was not diminished” (Moller 2006, 1034)

# Principle #10: Save contradictory ideas


